# AVTOMAT
### IT BUILDS.

`avtomat` began as a replacement for the venerable `make`, though it soon grew out of control and now it's also a library for writing preprocessors, among other things. Yet, it remains *chiefly* a build tool.

Way it works: you `cd` into your project directory, write a short config file, and call `avto` -- done.

So in spirit it's still very much like `make`, but instead of writing file lists, you only have to specify which files to *exclude*, if any, so the config files will usually just be the actual details on how to build what you mean to build.

Another thing that makes `avtomat` different is that it has it's own preprocessors, allowing you to write more or less standard code, but with a couple of utilities to help you write effectively *less*.

Thus, it's a build tool, but it's also kind of like a framework that I use to make small "customizations" to programming languages that I use, mainly C and Perl.


## 1. FEATURES
Non-exhaustive list; these are just the basic reasons why I wrote `avtomat` in the first place.


### 1.1 DEPENDENCY SOLVER
If a list of dependencies is passed to the build configuration of a library, then passing the name of said library to any subsequent build config will expand into the previously declared dependencies. This works recursively. In addition, `avtomat` reads dependency files generated by `gcc`, so includes are always checked when deciding if a file needs to be recompiled.


### 1.2 CMAM
A C preprocessor that mainly does three things:
* Adds the `macro` keyword, which lets you write Perl subroutines that you can call at compile time from within the C source. Yes, you read that right.
* Adds the `package` and `use` keywords so that you can turn your C file into a Perl module as well as reutilize code from other Perl modules.
* Gives you a `public` keyword that you can use inside source files; expressions marked as `public` are used to automatically generate the header for you.

See the `SWAN/cmacro.c` file for the full list of core features.

But in essence, `CMAM` is bit of an "interpreter layer" for C, kind of in the vein of an *actual* macro assembler, except the interpreter in question is Perl.


### 1.3 GENERATING BINDINGS
`avtomat` generates a `shwl` for each project it manages -- it is simply a record of what it builds, containing metadata about public symbols. If you may, think of the `shwl` as an "object" you can read to interface with a project; and it *is* literally just a Perl object you can read to do just that.

The `shwl` is used to manage dependencies and generate bindings, because for every C function you mark as `public`, `CMAM` takes note, and those notes end up in the `shwl`. Thus, given a list of source files, `avtomat` will build an XS module that binds those public symbols, bringing it full circle: you can write and execute Perl code inside your C source files, and then call your compiled C from within Perl.

Similarly, the `shwl` object can be used to generate bindings to and from other languages, though currently only the C<=>Perl feedback loop is fully implemented.
* Support for **flat assembler** is planned, as implementing a `CMAM` equivalent for `fasm` is fairly straightforward.
* Support for Python is certainly a *possibility*, but it's right at the bottom of the TODO list.


## 2. INSTALLATION
### 2.1 WINDOWS && MAC
No.


### 2.2 GNU/Linux
```bash
mkdir AR
cd AR
ARPATH=$(pwd)
git clone https://github.com/Liebranca/avtomat
cd avtomat
./BOOTSTRAP
```

There, rock 'n roll.

Of course, you can add `ARPATH` to your environs if you like, too. That's up to you.


## 3. UNINSTALLATION
```bash
rm -rf $ARPATH
```

Removing `ARPATH` from your environs is also left up to you ;>


## 4. USAGE
`avtomat` is made for managing multiple projects, where each project directory (logically) contains it's own source files and has it's own configuration file, named `avto.cfg`.

The directory that contains the project directories themselves, in turn, is internally known as the `root` and holds data common to all projects within.

So what's the big idea? Managing an entire codebase, rather than individual repos -- a `root` directory would look something like this:

```$
your/root/
· · project_a/
· · · · avto.cfg
· · · · (source_files)
· ·
· · project_b/
· · · · avto.cfg
· · · · (source_files)
· ·
· · bin/
· · · · (executables)
· · lib/
· · · · (libraries)
· · include/
· · · · (headers)
· ·
· · .cache/
· · · · (cached data)
· · .mem/
· · · · (for mmaps and sockets [yes])
· · .trash/
· · · · (build files)
```

And thus, if you have a BIG codebase, and need your projects to talk to one another, then `avtomat` makes your life easier.


### 4.1 CFG FILES
The `*.cfg` format is dead simple:
```$
%cfg;
key:expression
```

- `%cfg;` should be the first *expression* in the file. It's simply telling `avtomat` which util should be used to parse and interpret it.
- `key` can be any sequence of characters except a `:` colon.
- `expression` is a string that will be turned into an array via splitting at `/ +/` whitespaces.
  * This works about the same it does in `bash`, so if you need an element to contain spaces, you can stringify it by enclosing it in quotes "like this" or 'like this'.
  * As with `bash`, filename expansion is performed on each element (see: [glob](https://perldoc.perl.org/functions/glob)).
  * An element in `expression` cannot contain a `:` colon after a newline, *unless* you stringify it, as previously explained, in `""` double quotes or `''` single quotes.
  * You can wrap `expression` between `{}` curlies to stringify an entire block of code.

Reading a `*.cfg` file always gives you an array of `key=>[strings]`.


### 4.1.1 SIMPLE AVTO.CFG KEYS
Each key in an `avto.cfg` file maps to either an `avtomat` function or variable; an invalid key is ignored, and an omitted key simply means "do not call the associated function" or "use the default value".

Here's a full list of the keys `avtomat` recognizes:

- `bld:<mode> <name>` -- builds an object `<name>` from the provided sources using `<mode>`. If this field is skipped, then no compilation is done. Valid values for `<mode>` are:
  * `x`: make an executable.
  * `so`: make a shared object.
  * `ar`: make a static library.

- `boot:<code>` -- puts `<code>` (writ in Perl) at the very top of the makescript's body. Naturally, you can use `BEGIN` blocks for anything that needs to run *before* `avtomat` itself is loaded.

- `pre:<code>` -- puts `<code>` in the body of the pre-build hook.

- `post:<code>` -- puts `<code>` in the body of the post-build hook.

- `xport:<path>` -- list of C source files to generate bindings for.

- `lib:<path>` -- rolls the `-l` and `-L` flags of `gcc` into a single option.
  * Elements in `<path>` that contain a `/` forward slash are added to the library search path.
  * Elements in `<path>` that **do not** contain a `/` forward slash are interpreted as the names of libraries.

- `inc:<path>` -- same as the `-I` flag in `gcc`, adds elements in *path* into the include search path.

- `def:<name>=<value>` -- makes compile-time defines, same as `gcc -D<name>=<value>`.

- `skip:<path>` -- each element in `<path>` will be excluded from file sarch.

- `xcpy:<path>` -- makes a copy of each element in `<path>` to `your/root/bin`.

- `lcpy:<path>` -- makes a copy of each element in `<path>` to `your/root/lib`.


### 4.1.2 COMPLEX AVTO.CFG KEYS
The keys `util` and `test` follow the "complex" format for keys:

```$
<key>:[
  <target>:<args>
]
```

In which the `[]` square brackets denote recursion -- each `<target>` within is treated as a nested key. For example, the following:

```$
util:[
  my_app:-lz bin/src/my_app.c
]
```

Will compile `my_app` from `your/root/project/bin/src/my_app.c`, and link it against `zlib`.

- For the `util` key, each `<target>` is built and moved to `your/root/bin` with the appropriate name-change.
- For the `test` key, each `<target>` is built and executed -- if this fails, then `avtomat` stops the makescript as well.

Lastly, the `gen` key follows the same syntax, but instead of compilation arguments, each `<target>` expects a **block of perl code** from which to generate itself. For example:

```$
gen:[
  src/hello.rom:"HLOWRLD";
]
```

Would write "HLOWRLD" to the file `your/root/project/src/hello.rom`. Some notes:
- Generators are run *before* any file is compiled.
- If you have many generators using the same symbols or libraries, then you can import them within the `boot` key. For instance:

```$
boot:
  use lib "path/to/";
  use my_module qw(my_symbol);

# ...
gen:[
  src/hello.rom:my_symbol();
]
```


### 4.1.3 ADDITIONAL AVTO.CFG KEYS
These follow the same syntax as the "simple" keys, but are placed at the end as they're typically either controlled via commandline, used only by wizards, or not set on a per-project basis; added solely for completion.

- `debug:<int>` -- if non-zero, enables debug mode, corresponding with the `-g` switch. For convenience, it also sets the compile-time symbol `DEBUG` to the value of `<int>`. Defaults to `0`.

- `strip:<int>` -- if non-zero, enables stripping of output, corresponding with the `-s` switch.

- `shared:<int>` -- if non-zero, overrides `bld` to output a shared object, corresponding with the `-shared` switch.

- `entry:<name>` -- if non-null, sets an executable's entry point to `<name>`, corresponding with the `-e` switch. Defaults to `_start`.

- `obc:<flags>` -- controls flags used when **compiling** objects, corresponding with the `--obc` switch. If an element in `<flags>` matches the name of a preset, it's expanded to a list of hardcoded values. Recognized presets are:
  * `cstd`: **[default]** strikes a sensible balance between optimization and code size.
  * `swan`: same as `cstd`, but will violently shush the compiler's puritanical rants. This is what I use.
  * `light`: optimize for code size, marginal performance increases be damned.
  * `tiny`: you woke up one day, and chose to carry out the ultimate sacrifice in exchange for a smaller binary.
  * `heavy`: cranks the optimizations up to 11, which typically incurs longer compilation times and a sizable increase in code size.
  * `sonic`: for when nothing matters to you, save for one thing -- gotta go fast.

- `link:<flags>` -- controls flags used when **linking** objects, corresponding with the `--link` switch. If an element in `<flags>` matches the name of a preset, it's expanded to a list of hardcoded values. Recognized presets are:
  * `cstd`: **[default]** follows the same logic as `--obc=cstd`.
  * `flat`: similar to `cstd`, but uses `-nostdlib` and allows you to define your own `entry`. If you're the kind to roll your own `malloc`, then this is what you want.
  * `fflat`: full `flat`, an extreme setup for producing teensy binaries. It uses `--omagic`, so if you don't know what you're doing you're gonna have a bad time. You'd probably want this for bootloaders.

- `arch:<flags>` -- controls target architecture for the object made by `bld`, corresponding with the `--arch` switch and the `-m` switch of `gcc`. If an element in `<flags>` matches the name of a preset, it's expanded to a list of hardcoded values. Recognized presets are:
  * `x64`: **[default]** a generic option that should give you good-enough performance on virtually all PCs made in the second millenium AD.
  * `x86`: for code that should "just work" on *most* desktop computers that were alive during Y2K panic and continue to be in use.
  * `modern`: a more or less adequate setting for software that's only really supposed to run on CPUs from roughly 2015-2017 onwards.
  * `nitro`: much more aggressive version of the `modern` setting, meant for all the proud owners of a liquid nitrogen tank. Untested.
  * `native`: an option for when you don't actually care whether your neighbor's PC can run the code, and all you're interested in is making the most out of **your** computer. Use this if either every end user is expected to recompile your project or you yourself are the end user.
  * `toaster`: the year is 1989 and I recently acquired an FPU. Use this target if you want to run code on a computer *that* old. Untested. You'll most likely need to pair this with `--link=flat` as well as provide an `i486`-compatible build of `musl-libc`.
  * `abacus`: the year is 1985 and I do __not__ have an FPU. Same as with `toaster`, but for `i386`. Absolutely cursed and untested, but let us be clear, if you use this setting then you are in fact attaining the very pinnacle of memehood.


### 4.1.4 USER DEFAULTS AND PRESETS
Defining your own presets and defaults for any `avto.cfg` key is fully supported:
- Within `your/root`, `avtomat` will generate a `.config` directory.

- The `.config` directory located in the root where `avtomat` was installed (`$ARPATH/.config/avtomat/defv.cfg`) can be used to define **global** defaults and presets.

- You can override those global settings via the **local** config file (`your/root/.config/avtomat/defv.cfg`) for whenever you want to set an option codebase-wide.

The **local** `defv.cfg` will always override the **global** one. However, if the **local** config omits a certain option that the **global** one defines, then the global one will be used as fallback.

The `(root)/.config/avtomat/defv.cfg` file behaves the same as `avto.cfg`, so all keys listed in this document can be used to set defaults.

Setting presets for the `obc`, `link` and `arch` keys is fairly straightforward:

```$
obc-preset:[
  my-preset:<list of gcc switches>
]

link-preset:[
  my-preset:<list of gcc switches>
]

arch-preset:[
  my-preset:<list of gcc switches>
]
```

That would make it so passing `--obc=my-preset` to `avto` expands to the provided list of gcc switches. Furthermore, you can also use `my-preset` as a value for the `obc` key within your `avto.cfg` file; exact same story for `link` and `arch`.

And of course, you can name `my-preset` anything you want -- the only forbidden chars are `\n` newline and `:` colon.


### 4.2 COMMAND LINE INTERFACE
`avto <path> <options>`.
- `<path>` defaults to the current directory, so if you `cd` into your project directory you can just call `avto`.
- Passing in a `<path>` (as in `path/to/project`) is just there to support building multiple projects from a single script.
- Missing `avto.cfg` within `<path>` will `throw`.
- `<path>` can be passed after or before `<options>`, or in the middle of them, the order doesn't matter.

- Passing an invalid switch for `<options>` will `throw`. Valid switches are listed here:
  * `-u | --update` -- force the makescript to be regenerated.
  * `-c | --clean` -- cleanup the build directory and regenerate the makescript.
  * `-g | --debug` -- generates debug symbols, same as with `gcc`.
  * `-gc | --clean-debug` -- combines `-g` and `-c` for convenience.
  * `--arch=<name>` -- sets target architechture.
  * `--obc=<flags>` -- sets flags for object compilation.
  * `--link=<flags>` -- sets flags for object linking.

- Just for completion, these switches are also recognized. They closely match their `gcc` equivalents, and are applied on top of your `avto.cfg`:
  * `-D` -- adds compile-time defines to `def`.
  * `-I` -- adds search path to `inc`.
  * `-L` -- adds search path to `lib`.
  * `-l` -- adds library file to `lib`.
  * `-o || --output` -- sets `bld.name`.
  * `-shared` -- sets `bld.mode` to `so`.
  * `-e | --entry` -- sets entry point.
  * `-s || --strip` -- strips output, using:
    * `--strip-all` for executables.
    * `--strip-unneeded` for libraries.


### 4.4 AVTO OUTPUT
Besides the result of compilation (if any), running `avto` generates two additional files for book-keeping:
1. `your/root/.cache/project.px`: a serialized Perl hash holding your processed configuration.
2. `your/root/project/avtomat.pm`: the makescript itself, packaged as a Perl module, which you can run by itself using `perl avtomat.pm`.


## 5. LEGAL
`avtomat` is a non-commercial project that I wrote to build my other non-commercial projects, and as such I hardcoded the following bit in a core subroutine of the `Emit` module:

```freedom
Copyleft $AUTHOR $YEAR
Licensed under GNU GPL3
```

Which means that **all files you generate through `Emit` get GPL-slapped**. This is by default, by design, and there is absolutely no option to turn it off. For me, that's a feature.

However, GPL doesn't spread to program output so, in the case of files generated by `Emit` or any other means, you **fully retain the right to choose a different license to match your own needs**.

If that's the case, fork `avtomat` and modify `Emit` to both slap a different license on generated files as well as ensuring no GPL code is included by them, for obvious reasons.

Doing all of that is perfectly fine -- I only ask that you refrain from asking *me* to do it.
